Imagine asking 1,000 people
about their experience doing
something and deciding to do
that thing if most of their
experiences turned out well.
That's the essential flavor
of Monte Carlo.
Let's look at an example using
Monte Carlo for prediction.
By the end of this video,
you will be able to use
Monte Carlo prediction
to estimate
the value function
for a given policy.
Let's discuss the specifics of
the Monte Carlo
prediction algorithm using
an example with
a card game, blackjack.
Blackjack is played with
a standard deck of 52 cards.
The objective is to collect
cards so that their sum
is as large as possible
without exceeding 21.
Face cards are counted as 10,
while each ace can count as
11 or 1 based on
the player's preference.
The game begins with two cards
dealt to both the player
and the dealer.
The player can see one
of the dealer's cards,
but the other is face down.
If the player immediately has 21,
they win unless the dealer also
has 21 in which case they draw.
If the player doesn't
have 21 immediately,
they can request more cards
one at a time or a hit.
If the sum of the player's cards
ever exceeds 21,
we say the player
goes bust and loses.
Otherwise when the player
decides to stop
requesting cards or sticks,
it becomes the dealer's turn.
The dealer only hits if
the sum of their cards
is less than 17,
if the dealer goes
bust the player wins.
Otherwise, the winner
of the game is
a player who's sum
is closer to 21.
We can formulate this problem as
an undiscounted MDP where
each game of blackjack
corresponds to an episode.
Rewards are given at the end of
the game with minus
one for a loss,
zero for a draw,
and one for a win.
The player has
two actions, hit or stick.
The player decides to hit or
stick based on three variables,
whether they have a usable ace
which is an ace that can
count as 11 without
their sum exceeding 21,
the sum of their cards and
the card the dealer shows.
There are 200 states in total.
We assume the cards are dealt
from the deck with replacement.
This means that there's
no point in keeping track
of the cards that had
been dealt and that the
state respects
the Markov property.
Let's use Monte Carlo to
learn the value function for
the policy that sticks when
the player sum is 20 or 21.
Suppose in the first state,
the agents card shows
a total of 13 with
no usable ace and the dealers
visible card shows 10.
Since the agent's
policy is fixed,
it hits and gets a
7 moving it to 20.
The agent sticks
because its sum is
20 and it's now the dealers turn.
The dealer draws a nine
and goes bust losing
the game and resulting in plus
one reward for the agent.
Now, that the first episode
is over the agent can
perform a Monte Carlo update
and so start learning.
The return from each state in
a episode is plus one because
the only non-zero reward
is plus one at the end of
the episode and
the discount factor is one.
Now, let's look at the
states starting from
the end of the episode
and working backwards.
In the last non-terminal state,
the card sum was 20 with
no usable ace and the dealer
had a visible 10.
Let's call this state A.
We add plus one to the list
of returns for state A
and set the value of state
A equal to the average
of the list.
Stepping back to
the second last state, state B,
the agent shows 13 with
no usable ace and the dealer
has a visible 10.
Again, we add plus one to
the list of returns now for
state B and set the value of
state B equal to
the average of the list.
We've now processed every state
in the first episode and
completed the Monte Carlo
updates for that first episode.
Now, what would
happen if the agent
played many games of blackjack?
Let's look at the value
function the agent
learns after 10,000 episodes.
We'll plot one value function
for states with
a usable ace and one for
states without a usable ace.
The three axis of
the plot are the card
the dealer's showing,
the agents sum, and
the value of that state.
The plot with
usable aces is much more
rough than the plot
with no usable ace.
That's because
most blackjack games
do not have a usable ace so
the usable ace values are
estimated with far fewer samples.
Both plots have a similar shape.
Looking at the values
going across the plot,
it looks like the card
the dealer's showing
doesn't impact the value
function very much.
If we look at
the agent's sum however,
the value function
is much higher in
states where the agent
has a 20 or 21.
Why are these values
so much higher than
when the agent has a sum of 19?
The answer has to do with
the policy the agent
is following.
The policy always hits
on sums of 19 or lower.
So the agent is likely to
bust when the sum is 19.
On the other hand,
when the sum is
20 or 21 then the agent will
stick and is likely to win.
Now, let's look at the value
estimates after 500,000
episodes and the estimates have
nearly converged to
the state values.
Notice the plots are
much smoother now.
We see the same
pattern as before,
where the values are low
unless the sum is 20 or 21.
Now, what are some
of the implications
of Monte Carlo learning?
First, Monte Carlo learns
directly from experience.
So there's no need to keep
a large model of the environment.
Monte Carlo methods can estimate
the value of an individual state
independently of the values
of any other states.
In dynamic programming,
the value of
each state depends on
the values of other states.
So this is a pretty
big difference.
Finally, the computation needed
to update the value of each state
along the way doesn't depend
in any way on
the size of the MDP.
Rather, it depends on
the length of the episode.
In this video, we
showed how to use
Monte Carlo prediction to
learn the value
function of a policy,
and talked about how
Monte Carlo learning doesn't
need to sweep over the whole MDP.